ROtate Left Byte                  ROLB dst                        2.3 ....

ROLBIL_'~IL-~O~__L--L_6~~__~3-L~L-~~ld_S_t~I__~~~

15                                                 65             o

Operation: as in ROlon byte operands

Condition Codes: set on the byte results as ROl

Description: Same as ROl

Arithmetic Shift Right Byte       ASRB dst                        2.3=.

ASRB 11 I 1 0 I               I6                2       dst           o
                                                       I
                                                                      o
t5                                                 65

Operation: as in ASR on byte operands

Condition Codes: set on the byte result as ASR

Description: Same as ASR

. Arithmetic Shift Let! Byte      ASLB dst

ASLB 11 I I 0 I               6             I3          dst
                                                       I

15                                                 65

Operation: as in ASl on byte operands
Condition. Codes: set on the byte results as ASl
Description: Same as ASl

CONDITION CODE OPERATORS-Condition code operators set and clear con·
dition code bits. Selectable combinations of these bits may be cleared6rset
together in one instruction.

Condition Code Operators                                          1.5.lLS

          o                   o                 2

15                                                 5 4 32         0

Condition code bits corresponding to bits in the condition code operator

(bits 3·0; N, l, V, C) are modified according to the sense of bit 4, the setl

clear bit of the operator. The following mnemonics are permanent symbols

in the assembler:

Mnemonic  Operation           Op Code       Mnemonic   Operation  Op Code
    ClC    Clear C            000241            SEC       Set C   000261
    ClV    Clear V            000242            SEV       Set V   000262
    Cll    Clear l            00();244          SEl       Set l   000264
    ClN    Clear N                              SEN       Set N   000270
                              000250

Timing for all condition code operators is the basic instruction time (1.5/Ls)
for the operators. (The codes 000240 and 000260 are the shortest "no·opera·
tion" instructions.)

· Shift and rotate operations require an additional 0.6 I'S to access bytes at odd
   addresses.

                                            40
= Combinations of the above set or clear operations may be ORed together to

form new instruction mnemonics. For example: ClCV ClC ! ClV. The new
instruction clears C and V bits. ("!" signifies "inclusive or" in PAl·l1.)

MISCELLANEOl!S CONTROL INSTRUCTIONS

RESe' ExTernal bus                RESET          20 ms
                                                 5
° I 0,                         °         ,0  ,0              RESET
                                                    °
15

Condition Codes: not affected

Description: Sends an INIT pulse on the Unibus. All devices on the bus are
reset to their state at power·up.

WAit for InterrupT                WAIT           \.8.11.5

1~_O~I~~t__O~,__~~t_O~__~-L_O_t~-L~~O~~__~~~lvvAIT

15                                               o

Condition Codes: not affected
Description: Provides a way for the processor to relinquish use of the bus
while it waits for an external interrupt. Having been given a WAIT command,
the processor will not compete for bus use by fetching instructions or
operands from memory. This permits higher transfer rates between a device
and memory, since no processor·induced latencies will be encountered by
bus requests from the device. In WAIT, as in all instructions, the PC points
to the next instruction following the WAIT operation.

Thus whim an interrupt causes the PC and PS to be pushed onto the proces·
sor stack, the address of the next instruction following the WAIT is saved.
The exit from the interrupt routine (i.e. execution of an RTI instruction) will
cause resumption of the interrupted process at the instruction following the
WAIT.

HALT                              HALT           1.8.11.5 /

     "°,            10                   ,0  0,  ° HALT
                                                     t
  15

Condition Codes: not affected
Description: Causes the processor operation to cease. The console is given
control of the bus. The console data lights display the contents of RO; the
console address lights display the address of the halt instruction. Tr~nsfers
on the Unibus are terminated immediately. The. PC points to the next in-
struction to be executed. Pressing the continue key on the console causes
processor operation to resume. No INIT signal is given.

Processor:Traps, -Processor Traps are internally generated interrupts.
Error conditions, completion of an instruction in trace mode (i.e. T-bit of
status word set), 'and certain instructions cause traps. As in interrupts, the
current PC and PS are saved on the processor stack and a new PC and PS
are loaded from the appropriate trap (interrupt) vector. See Appendix C for
a summary of Trap Vector Addre,sses.

Trap Instructions-Trap Instructions provide for calls to emulators, I/O
monitors, debugging packages, and user-defined interpreters.

                                         41
   EMulator Traps                   EMT xxx                       9.3 JJ.S

   EMT LI..:.I....LI--.JL:.0....L_L-....LI....:4....L_LI....:°:......L_.L..-1_..L_--1'_XX_x...LI_....L...--1---l

   15                               87                               °

   Operation: (PS) -.l, SP
                   (PC) -.l, SP
                    (30) ~ PC
                   (32) ~ PS

   Condition Codes: loaded from trap vector.

Description: Performs a trap sequence with a trap vector address of 30.
All operation codes from 104000 to 104377 are EMT calls. The low·order
byte, bits 0·7 of the EMT instructions, may be used to transmit information
to the emulating routine (e.g., function to be performed). The trap vector
for EMT is at address 30. The new PC is taken from the word at address 30;
the new central processor status (PS) is .taken from the word at address 32.

   TRAP                             TRAP xxx                         9.3.u.s

   TRAP LI_1....LI_L-0....L_.L..-11_4-1_~1_4__1_..L_~_~~'Lxx_x~IL__L~L_~

   15                               87                               °

   Operation: as in EMT except the trap vector is located at 34.

Condition Codes: loaded from trap vector.

Description: Performs a trap sequence with a trap vector address of 34.
Operation codes from 104400 to 104777 are TRAP instructions. TRAPs and
EMTs are identical in operation, except that the trap vector for TRAP is at
address 34.

   110 Trap                         lOT                           9.3.u.s

   lOT LI~0~_~0~,_.L..-11....:0~_..L_~ILO~I_~~'~0~,L__L_,~4~'L-~

   15                                                                °

   Operation: as EMT except the trap vector is located at address 20 and no

   information is transmitted in the low byte.

Condition Codes: loaded from trap vector.

Description: Used to call the I/O executive routine lOX.

   No defined mnemonic              000003                        9.3.u.s

(            0,                  °            °  °                3

                                                                     °

Operation: Same' as lOT except that trap vector is located at address 14.

Condition Codes: loaded from trap veCtor.

Description: Used' to' call debugging aids. The user is cautioned against
employing code 000003 in programs run under these debugging aids.

                                         42
ReTurn from Interrupt  RTl                        4.8J1.s

                       oI               0,     o  2.       RTI

15                                                    o

Operation: SP l' (PC), SP l' (PS).

Condition Codes: loaded from processor stack.

Description: Used to exit from an interrupt or TRAP service routine. The PC
and PS are restored (popped) from the processor stack.

Reserved Instruction Traps-These are caused by attempts to execute in-
struction codes reserved for future processor expansion (reserved instruc-
tions) or instructions with illegal addressing modes (illegal instructions).
Order codes not corresponding to any of the instructions described above
are considered to be reserved instructions. Illegal instructions are JMP and
JSR with register mode destinations. Reserved and illegal instruction traps
occur as described under EMT, but trap through vectors at addresses 10
and 04 respectively.

Stack Overflow Trap-Stack Overflow Trap is a processor trap through the
vector at address 4. It is caused by referencing addresses below 400. through
the processor staclt pointer R6 (SP) in autodecrement or autodecrement de-
ferred addressing. The instruction causing the overflow is completed before
the trap is made.

Bus Error Traps-Bus Error Traps are:

1. Boundary Errors-attempts to reference word operands at odd ad-
    dresses.

2. Time-Out Errors-attempts to reference addresses on the bus that
    made no response within 10 j.Ls. In general, these are caused by at-
    tempts to reference nonexistent memory, and attempts to reference
    nonexistent peripheral devices.

Bus error traps cause processor traps through the trap vector address 4.

Trace Trap--Trace Trap enables bit 4 of the PS word and causes processor
traps at the end of instruction executions. The instruction that is executed
after the instruction that set the T-bit will proceed to completion and then
cause a processor trap through the trap vector at address 14.

The following are special cases and are detailed in subsequent paragraphs;

1. The traced instruction cleared the T-bit.
2. The traced instruction set the T-bit.
3. The traced instruction caused an instruction trap.
4. The traced instruction caused a bus error trap.
5. The traced instruction caused a stack overflow trap.
6. The process was interrupted between the time the T-bit was set and

    the fetching of the instruction that was to be traced.
7. The traced instruction was a WAIT.
8. The traced instruction was a HALT.

An instruction that cleared the T-bit-Upon' fetching the traced instruction
an internal flag, the trace flag, was set. The trap will still occur at the end
of execution of this instruction. The stacked status word, however, will have
a clear T-bit.

                                    43
An instruction that set the T-bit-Sinc~ the T-bit was already set, setting it
again has no effect_

An instruction that caused an Instruction Trap-The instruction trap is
sprung and the entire routine for the service trap is executed_ If the service
routine exists with an RTI or in any other way restores the stacked status
word, the T-bit is set again, the instruction following the traced instruction
is executed and, unless it is one of the special cases noted above, a trace
trap occurs_

An instruction that caused a Bus Error-This is treated as ih an Instruction
Trap. The only difference is that the error service is not as likely to exit
with an RTI, so that the trace trap may not occur.

An instruction that caused a stack overflow-The instruction completes
execution as usual-the Stack Overflow does not cause a trap. The Trace
Trap Vector is loaded into the PC and PS, and the old PC and PS are pushed
onto the stack. Stack Overflow occurs again, and this time the trap is made.

An interrupt between setting of the T-bit and fetch of the traced instruction-
The entire interrupt service routine is executed and then the T-bit is set again
by the exiting RTI. The traced instruction is executed (if there have been no
either interrupts) and, unless it is a special case noted above, causes a trace
trap.

Note that no interrupts are acknowledged between the time of fetching any
trapped instruction (including one that is trapped by reason of the T-bit being
set) and completing execution of the first instruction of the trap service.

A WAIT-The trap occurred immediately. The address of the next instruction
is saved on the stack.

A HALT-The processor halts. When the' continue key on the console is
pressed, the instruction following the HALT is fetched and executed. Unless
it is one of the exceptions noted above, the trap occurs immediately follow-
ing execution_

Power Failure Trap-is a standard PDP-ll feature. Trap occurs whenever

theAC power drops below 105 volts or outside 47 to 63 Hertz. Two milli-

seconds are then allowed for power down processing. Trap vector for power

failure is at locations 24 and 26.      ""

Trap priorities-In case multiple processor trap conditions occur simUltane-
ously the following order of priorities is observed (from high to low):

1. Bus Errors
2. Instruction Traps
3. Trace Trap
4. Stack Overflow Trap

5. Power Failure Trap

The details on the trace trap process have been described in the trace trap
operational description which includes cases in which an instruction being
traced causes a bus error, instruction trap, or a stack overflow trap:

If a bus error is caused by the trap process handling instruction traps, trace
traps, stack overflow traps, or a previous bus error, the processor is halted.

If a stack overflow is. caused by the trap process in handling bus errors, in-
struction traps, or trace traps, the process is completed and then the stac~
overflow trap is sprung.

                                    44
                             CHAPTER 5

                     ADDRESS ALLOCATION

The PDP-ll provides for a very flexible addressing structure. Both 16-bit
words and 8-bit bytes can be directly addressed_ Addresses are 16-bits long
allowing for direct addressing of 32,768 words or 65,536 bytes.

ADDRESS MAP

As a result of the organization of the PDP-ll, bus addresses serve several
functions..A map of possible PDP-ll bus address allocation is shown

BUS ADDRESS  CONTENT

        o                     ~

             Program Counter                            Processor
                                                        Trap Vectors
             Processor Status wor1                      and Device
                                                        Interrupt
                                                        Vectors

400.         Stack Pointer Overflow Limit
             Stacks, Program and Data Storage

160000.

             Status Register and}                             Typical
             Data Buffer Register                             Registers for
                                                        { Programmed
                                                              Transfer
                                                              Device

             Space For Device Registers                 Typical
                                                        Additional
                          Device Address Register       Registers
                          Word Count Register           for a
                          Memory Address Register       Block
                          Control and Status Registers  Transfer
                                                        Device

177777.

                              Figure 5-1
             Simplified Address Allocation Map

                                 45
·in Figure 5-1. Three areas of addresses of particular interest to the pro-
 grammers are: 1) Interrupt and Trap Vectors; 2) Processor Stack and General
 Storage; and 3) Peripheral Device Registers.

INTERRUPT AND TRAP VECTOR5--Addresses between location zero and
location 400, are generally reserved for interrupt and trap vectors.

PROCESSOR STACK AND GENERAL STORAGE-Addresses between 400,
and the limit of implemented core are available for the processor stack or
other programs and data. The highest address in this region is 157777,.

PERIPHERAL DEVICE REGISTER5--Addresses above 160000, generally are

reserved for peripheral device status, control, and data registers. The general

registers and the processor status can be addressed from the program

.console using addresses in this area.      .

A more detailed address allocation map can be found in Appendix- C.

CORE MEMORY

The three types of core memory that can be used in a PDP-ll system are:
1) Read-Write Core Memory; 2) Read-Only Core Memory; and 3) Wordlet
Memory; These memories can be located anywhere in address space provided
they do not overlap. They do not have to be in continuous address locations.

MMll-E READ WRITE CORE MEMORY-The MMll-E has the following
specifications:

Capacity: 4,096 16-bit words or 8,192 8-bit bytes
Cycle Time: 1.2 microseconds
Access Time: 500 nanoseconds
Configuration: Planar 3-wire, 3·D using 22 mil cores

Packaging: One standard PDp·l1 System Unit
Interface: Designed to work with PDP-ll bus, TTL-compatible

MRll-A READ-ONLY CORE MEMORY (ROM)-The ROM has the following
specifications:

Capacity: 1,024 I6-bit words or 2,048 8·bit bytes
Access Time: 500 nanoseconds
Configuration: 2-piece core with wire braid, 256 wires, 64 cores
Packaging: 3/4 of one standard PDP-ll System Unit
Interface: Designed to work with PDp·ll bus, TTL-compatible

MWll-A WORDLET MEMORY-The wordlet memory is used with ROM sys-
tems and provides read-write memory capacity for temporary data and in-
struction storage.
Capacity: 256 16-bit words or 512 8-bit bytes

Cycle Time: 2.0 microseconds
Access Time: 1.0 microsecond
Configuration: 3·Wire, 3D
Packaging: I/4.standard PDP-ll single System Unit
Interface: The word let memory will work with the ROM and interfaces

               through the ROM System Unit to the PDP-ll bus.

Both JMP. an~ JSR, used in Address mode 2 (autoincrement),     increment  otfheanyre  gister
~efore ~s,"g It as an address. This is a special case. and is  not true               other
instruction.

                                        46
                             CHAPTER 6

              PROGRAMMING OF PERIPHERALS

Programming of peripherals is extremely simple in the PDP-ll-a special
class of instructibns to deal with input/output operations is unnecessary_
The Unibus permits a unified addressing structure in which control, status,
and data registers for peripheral devices are directly addressed as memory
locations_ Therefore all operations on these registers, such as transferring
information into or out of them or manpulating data within them, are per-
formed by normal memory reference instructions_

The ability to use all memory reference instructions on peripheral device
registers greatly increases the flexibility of input/ output programming_ In-
formation in a device register can be compared directly with a value and a
branch made on the result.

                               CMP # 101, PRS

                                        SEQ SERVICE
In this case the program looks for 101. from the paper tape reader data
buffer, and branches if it finds it. There is no need to transfer the informa-
tion into an intermediate register for comparison.

When the character is of interest, a memory reference instruction can trans-
fer the character into a user buffer in core or in another peripheral device.

                                           MOV PRS, LOC
This instruction transfers a character from the paper tape reader buffer into
a user-defined location_

All arithmetic operations can be performed on a peripheral device register.

                                    ADD #10, DSX
This instruction will add 10. to a display's x-deflection register.

All peripheral device registers can be treated as accumulators. There is no
need to funnel all data transfers, arithmetic operations, and comparisons
through a single or small number of accumulator registers_

DEVICE REGISTERS

All peripheral devices are specified by a set of registers which are addressed
as core memory and manipulated as flexibly as an accumulator. There are
two types of registers associated with each device: 1) Control and Status Reg-
isters (CSR); and 2) Data Registers.

CONTROL AND STATUS REGISTERS (CSR)-Each peripheral has one or more
control and status registers which contain all. the information necessary to
communicate with that device. The general form of a control and status
register is shown below.

                              General Control and Status Register
This general form does not necessarily apply to any device, but is presented
as a format which could be used as a guideline for designing peripheral

                                                  47
devices. Many devices will require less than sixteen status bits. Other devices
will require more than sixteen bits and therefore will require additional status
and control registers.

Device Function Bits-These three bits specify operations that a device is
to perform. An example of one -operation for a paper tape reader is read
one character. For a disk one operation would be read a block of words from
memory and store them on the disk.

Memory Exter1sion Bits-These two bits are reserved for future expansion.
They will allow devices to use a full 18 bits to specify addresses on the bus.

Done Enable and Error Enable Bits-These two bits are independently pro-
grammable. _If bit 6 -is set. an interrupt will occur as a result of a function

done condition. If bit 5 is set. an interrupt will occur as the result otan

error condition. This occurs when one or more of the error bits is set to a
one. To initiate an interrupt routine to read from the paper .tape reader.
the instruction

                             MOV # 101, PRS

could be used. This sets bit 0 and bit 6 of the paper tape reader control and
status register. Setting bit 0 starts the read operation and setting bit 6
enables an interrupt to occur when the read operation is complete.

Condition Bits-The CSR contains a DONE bit. a READY bit, or a DONE-
BUSY pair of bits, depending on the device. These bits are set and cleared
by the hardware, but may be queried by the program to determine the
availability of the device. For example, the teleprinter status register (TPS)
has a READY bit (7) that is cleared on request for output and then set when
output is complete. The keyboard status register (TKS) has a DONE-BUSY

= pair (Bits 7 and 11) that distinguishes between no input (DONE BUSY
= = = 0), input under way (DONE 0, BUSY 1). and input complete (DONE
= = 1, BUSY 0).

The DONE bit could be used to control an input loop for reading from the

paper tape reader as follows;

LOOP: TSTB PRS                  test low byte of paper tape status register

    BPL LOOP                    branch back if DONE bit (bit 7) is not set

Unit Bits-Some peripheral systems have more than one device per control.

For example, a disk system can have multiple surfaces per control and an

analog-to-digital converter can have multiple channels. The unit bits select

the proper surface or channel.            -

Error Bits-Generally there is an individual bit associated with a specific
error. When more bits are required for errors, they can be obtained by ex-
panding the error section in the word or by using another status word.

Example of Control and Status Register-The high-speed paper tape reader
control and status register (PRS) is as follows:

15              "                   7  6     o

These bits may be read or set by instructions which use the appropriate

effective address. Bit 0 of the PRS is the function bit for reading one char-

                                48
acter. Incrementing the PRS will set 'bit 0 and cause one character to be
read. The instruction

                                               INC PRS
performs that function. MOV # I, PRS does the same thing but takes one
more word.

DATA BUFFER REGISTERS-Each device has at least one buffer register
for temporarily storing data to be transfer into or out of the computer. The
number and type of data registers is a function of the device. The paper
tape reader and punch use single 8·bit data buffer registers. A disk would
use 16·bit data registers and some devices may use tw!, I6·bit registers for
data buffers.

PROGRAMMING EXAMPLES

PROGRAM CONTROLLED DATA TRANSFER WITH THE INTERRUPT DISABLED
~Single character 110 devices (teletype, paper tape readerl punch) have an
addressable register buffer through which data is transferred. For inPut, the
data buffer register is the source operand of the instruction used to get the
data; for output, it is the destination operand. For example assuming the
paper tape reader interrupt is not enabled, character input could proceed
as follows:

START:  MOV R, -(SP)                   save R on the stack
LOOP:   MOV #BUFFER, R                 pointer to input buffer into register R
        INC PRS                        start up reader
        BIT PRS. #100200               test DONE and ERROR bits'
        BEQ LOOP                       branch back if none ·on yet
        BMI ERROR                      branch to error routine if minus
        MOVB· PRB; (R)+                move byte from device buffer reg·
                                       ister touser's buffer and increment
        CMP #LlMIT. R                  pointer
        BGE START                      check for end of buffer
        MOV (SP)+. R                   get next character
                                       restore R

Character output to the paper tape punch might be executed as .follows:

        MOV RO, -(SP)·                 save RO
        MOV RI, -(SP)                  save RI

LOOP:   MOV NCHAR, RO                  number of characters into RO
        MOV BUFFER, R1                 user buffer address into R1
        BIT PPS, # 100200              test device ready and error bits
        BEQ LOOP                       fall through if on
        BMI ERROR                      branch on error

        MOVB (RI)+, PPB                output character,' increment pointer
        DEC RO                         decrement character counter (and
                                       set condition codes)

        BGT LOOP                       repeat if greater than zero
                                       restore RO
        MOV (SP)+. RO                  restore R1

        MOV (SP)+. Rl

BLOCK TRANSFER WITH THE INTERRUPT DISABLED-High·speed block

transfer devices use the Unibus to make data transfers between the device

and core memory. These devices are provided with addressible registers

that control the flow of data.  '

                                   49
A typical set might be:

       1. Control and status register
       2. Memory address register
       3. Word count register
       4. Device address register

Loading the device address register would in general initiate the transfer,
which then proceeds without processor intervention. The device issues non-
processor requests for the Unibus that, when granted, allow' direct data
transfer between the device and memory_ These requests are interleaved
with processor 'requests for the bus. If very fast transfer is required, the

processor may execute a, WAIT instruction after starting the block transfer.

The DONE or appropriate error bits are set in the CSR with completion of
the transfer or when an error occurs. These may be enabled to cause an
interrupt or may be tested to determine when the device needs assistance.

A block transfer could be executed as follows:

MOV #401, DKS,                             read block of data (function 1)
                                           from unit 1
MOV #BUFADR. DKMA                          buffer address to memory ad-
                                           dress register
MOV #BUFCNT, DKWC                          word count to word count register
MOV # BLKNO, DKDA                          block number to device address
                                           register, which starts the trans-
                                           fer

; when data is needed.

LOOP: BIT # DKMSK, DKS                     test done bit and error bits
            BEQ LOOP                       branch back if none on
            BIT # DKEMSK, DKS              test for any error bits
            BNE ERROR                      branch if any on

; data is now in buffer at BUFADR

INTERRUPT STRUCTURE

If the appropriate interrupt enable bit is on, in the control and status register
of a device, transition from 0 to 1 of the DONE or -READY bit causes an
interrupt request to be issued to the processor. Also if DONE or READY is a
1 when the interrupt enable is turned on, an interrupt request is made. If
the device makes the request at a priority greater than that at which the
processor is running and no other conflicts exist, the request is granted and
the interrupt sequence takes place:

       a. the current program counter and processor status are pushed onto
           the processor stack; _

       b. the new PC and PS are loaded from a pair of locations (the interrupt
           vector) in low core unique to the interrupting device~

Since each device has a unique interrupt vector which dispatches control to
the appropriate interrupt handling routine immediately, no device polling is
required. Furthermore, since the PS contains the processor priority, the
priority at which an' interrupt request is serviced can be set under program
control and is independent of the priority of the interrupt request. The

                                       50
